---
layout: page
sectionmenu: processes
title: RADAR
permalink: /policies-processes/radar/
---

## Scope

* RADAR - Restricted Access DAta Repository forms part of the data repository service managed by the University of Leeds Library. 
* RADAR is designed to hold data which cannot be shared openly. 
* Data deposited in RADAR will have been generated by research activity led by the University of Leeds or where University of Leeds is a research partner.  
* All datasets held within RADAR are subject to a Deposit Agreement (signed by the data depositor) warranting that they have appropriate rights to deposit the data.  
* Datasets held in RADAR (optionally) have a public metadata record in the open Research Data Leeds repository outlining the dataset contents and conditions of access.  Access to RADAR datasets are via a registration process. The metadata record provides a link to a data request form.  

## Access controls 

* The RADAR repository manages access to datasets using registered RADAR user accounts. 
* Data access requests are handled in line with the Data Access escalation model  
* Where a request for access is successful, the RADAR user account allows the requestor to log-in, view the metadata and download the requested data file(s) either to an approved environment or to their own system. 
* Each registered user account in RADAR is restricted to a specific dataset(s) and is active for a specified period of time after which access is disabled. 
* Data requesters must agree to an End User Agreement / Data Sharing Agreement which includes: 
  * Agreed period of access 
  * Data will be processed with appropriate security 
  * Re-identification of participants will not be attempted 
  * Data will be not be reshared 
  * Data will be removed at the end of the agreed period 
  * any additional stipulations required by the depositor or relevant third parties (for example, a research partner or data supplier). 
* Any challenges to dataset access decisions will be handled through the Data Access Group under the Data Access Escalation model agreed with the University of Leeds Research and Innovation Board.  
* Where there are any concerns about a dataset held in the repository a Take-down policy and process will be followed. 

## Technical infrastructure 

The RADAR repository runs on EPrints software. Repository contents are stored on the University of Leeds storage infrastructure. 

The University of Leeds operates an Information Security Management System (ISMS) based upon the best principles of ISO/IEC 27001 Code of Practice for Information Security Management. However, the RADAR repository service has not applied for / attained  ISO 27001 (Information Security Management) accredited certification or compliance with the NHS Digital Information Governance Toolkit. 

RADAR includes two modes of storage – Encrypted or Unencrypted, both requiring user registration for data access.  

**Encrypted**  
* Data on University provided storage infrastructure 
* Storage infrastructure access controlled 
* Data encrypted and encryption passwords managed through appropriate authority (probably IRC/LIDA) 

_Reuser Access_
* User registration – username and password 
* Agreed period of time 
* Access only to agreed dataset 
* Subject to End-User / Data-Sharing agreement 
* Data transferred only to approved environment (e.g. IRC / LIDA) 

**Unencrypted**
* Data on University provided storage infrastructure 
* Storage infrastructure access controlled 