---
layout: page
sectionmenu: dmp
title: Ethics, Safeguarding and Legal Compliance
index: true
permalink: /data-management/ethics-safeguarding-legal-compliance/
---

The University provides [information and guidance on good practice in ethics and ethical review](https://ris.leeds.ac.uk/research-ethics-and-integrity/ethics-and-ethical-review/) as well as [application forms, guidance notes and other resources](https://ris.leeds.ac.uk/research-ethics-and-integrity/university-ethical-review/).

## Data Classification and ethical review

As you are dealing with data undergoing ethical review, your data is best classified according to the [Turing Classification model](https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.11815224.v4).

All projects that have data classified as either Tier 3 or 4 are guided to the university facilities for storing data during your research project and advice on security measures such as using encryption, particularly useful if you are gathering information in the field.

Examples of how commonly used data is classified can be found in the University’s [Information Management Guide](https://dataprotection.leeds.ac.uk/wp-content/uploads/sites/48/2019/05/Information-Management-Guide.pdf) and further details are available in the [Information Protection Policy](https://leeds.service-now.com/it?id=kb_article&sys_id=6038bfbc0fae728089d7f55be1050e9d).

If you have further questions in this area, please contact:

* [Business Relationship Management](https://it.leeds.ac.uk/it/?id=kb_article&sys_id=1e7d25a5db7f130040b3789e3b9619c5)
* [IT Assurance Manager, Neil Favager](mailto:N.Favager@leeds.ac.uk)

## Consent, Contractual and Legal Agreements

* A Data Protection Impact Assessment (DPIA) is a GDPR requirement used to identify and minimize the data protection risks in your data including that relating to any non-UK fieldwork locations.  It is important that you contact the University Secretariat - [A.C.Temple@leeds.ac.uk](mailto:A.C.Temple@leeds.ac.uk) - to confirm requirements in relation to this.
* If the project is using any data generated by someone else, establish permission early in the project, both for use by the project and for sharing, during and beyond the term of the project - to include securing agreement from the copyright holder/ explain to the copyright holder how you intend to further share the data.
* The University’s [Informed Consent Protocol](http://ris.leeds.ac.uk/wp-content/uploads/2020/07/Informed_Consent_Protocol.pdf) requires an aligned participant consent form and information sheet inclusive of the following wording to be added to all consent forms to allow for open data sharing of anonymised data / restricted access to the confidential data as appropriate: _"Subject to any data licensing or other contractual restrictions that may apply, as appropriate, I agree for the anonymised research data collected by me to be stored/and or shared for future use"_. 
* Consent should be sought from all participants at the earliest opportunity. All plans for the data should cover all the ways you plan to handle data pre, during and post project. This should include storing/sharing in an anonymised form. Any data retention intentions post project, regardless of duration should include plans for data deposit/sharing in a trusted/archive or repository. Our team can advise you further on this.
* For data planned to be stored and shared on a restricted basis eg for research purposes only, our suggested consent wording would be _“I agree for the data collected from me to be stored and used in relevant future research in an anonymised/pseudonymised form”_.
* For data planned to be stored and shared more openly, eg more publicly, our suggested consent wording would be _“I understand that the research data, which will be anonymized (not linked to me), may be shared publicly for future use”_.
* 'Technical', 'Sharing' and 'Processing' data agreements, consent, permission, or arrangements for data transfer or sharing between the University of Leeds and any project partners either in or out of the UK should always be formalized with the support of the [University's RIS Contracts Team](http://ris.leeds.ac.uk/info/29/contracts_and_grant_t_and_cs/29/meet_the_legal_services_team). This will best ensure all research partners are able to legally undertake associated data-related research activity in the short, medium, and longer-term. 

## Safeguarding 

Data generated from children, young persons or adults who may or may not be in a vulnerable circumstances must be processed in accordance with the [Policy on Safeguarding children, young persons and adults in vulnerable circumstances](https://www.leeds.ac.uk/secretariat/documents/safeguarding_policy.pdf) - part of the [University’s suite of data safeguards](https://library.leeds.ac.uk/info/14062/research_data_management/63/safeguarding_data/2) that exist to make sure all research data generated in the course of research is appropriately safeguarded. This will ensure appropriate protections are inherent in the dataset. 

## Licensing

If you are intending to make your data available for public use, consider which type of license would be appropriate. Most datasets in the Research Data Leeds repository have a [Creative Commons licence](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/), or an [MIT license](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT) for software. Other licenses are available, and we can provide advice on your options.## Intellectual Property (IP)

## Intellectual Property (IP)

The intellectual property of the data generated will remain with the University of Leeds. However, the University policy of the management of research data requires all data arising from research projects to be made openly available where possible. (The research will not use any data which is covered by the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988 or any other similar legislation.) 

## Permissions for secondary use of data by you

Publicly available data does not automatically come with permission for you to reuse and share and you may still need a secured agreement from the copyright holder following explanation to the copyright holder about how you intend to further share the data. For any data used that cannot be shared further, ensure full bibliographic citations are included in any of your research outputs, to enable other researchers to find the material you have used in your research. 

## Anonymization 

Anonymisation should follow guidance given in the [ICO Anonymization Code of Practice](https://ico.org.uk/media/1061/anonymisation-code.pdf) which supports data for controlled access as outlined in the University’s IPP / Suite of Data Safeguards. eg confidential / highly confidential data 

## Handling sensitive data

Any sensitive data (as defined by the Data Protection Act) that is stored on portable electronic devices must be protected by encryption software to [FIPS 140-2 standard](https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/fips/140/2/final). Any sensitive data that needs to be transmitted electronically must be encrypted before transmission. 

If any highly sensitive data needs to be stored, it must be encrypted so it can only be accessed by authorised members of the project with the appropriate credentials. 

## Using archive materials:  

If archival materials are included in data that are owned by others - such as scans or photographs of original archive material - clearance to use these materials must be sought from the archive for **any planned use of the material** within and beyond the project.

For future sharing and reuse of archive material, the inclusion of metadata, licensing or copyright information which will advise potential re-users about how or what can be done with the materials must be included in the dataset.

## Using information involving participants or interviewees:  

If you are recording, photographing, or producing transcripts from participants (at events for example) or interviewees you must seek consent from them for your planned use of the files both within your research **and** for future sharing. This will include plans for anonymisation and how both the raw and anonymised material will be handled and shared.

### Social Media 

If outputs from social media are included in the data, they should be captured, described and deposited for long term access alongside other research outputs from the project. 
